ICS 46 Spring 2022 | News | Course Reference | Schedule | Project Guide | Notes and Examples | Reinforcement Exercises | Grade Calculator | About Alex

ICS 46: Data Structure Implementation and Analysis
Spring 2022
Course Reference

Instructor information

Alex Thornton
Office: DBH 4048 (note that this is not where office hours are held; see below)
Email: thornton@ics.uci.edu
How best to contact me

I tend to be much easier to reach via email than any other way, so I would suggest using email to contact me under normal circumstances. As it turns out, I'm not in my office all that often, but I am connected online quite a lot.

When you write me an email, it's not a bad idea to be sure you're including enough contextual information in your email that I'll be able to answer the question: your name, your student ID#, and which course you're enrolled in are all good data points to include. Without things like this, it raises the likelihood that I won't understand the context of the question you're asking (e.g., "When is Project 1 due?" is a question that has a different answer in different courses of mine), which means we'll need an additional round trip to get the matter settled.

Office hours

I'll be offering virtual office hours via Zoom on Mondays and Wednesdays from 6:00pm-7:00pm, beginning on Wednesday, March 30. You'll find a link in the Canvas course space.

If you require a conversation privately at other times, I'll do my best to accommodate your request, but we'll schedule those on an ad hoc basis; email me as a starting point and let me know what you'd like to discuss and what times you are available. With a total of about 500 students in two courses this quarter, I may not be able to accommodate every request, so I may also direct you to other places you can get help more quickly (such as the lab meetings with TAs and tutors, which I'll describe below), but I'll certainly try to accommodate requests that I'm best equipped to handle myself.

Course staff

In addition to me, this course is staffed by a number of folks in a few different roles. They are listed below.

Teaching assistants

There are two teaching assistants, who will share the duties of attending lab meetings, will serve as an additional source of assistance on your projects and via the Ed Discussion online discussion board, and will be the primary point of contact with regard to the grading of the projects and reinforcement exercises.

Isabela Figueira (ifigueir AT uci DOT edu)
Jessica Souza (jconceic AT uci DOT edu)
Readers

Additionally, we have two readers, who will be tasked with grading projects and reinforcement exercises.

Freddy Reiber (ereiber AT uci DOT edu)
Rei Vignapiano (evignapi AT uci DOT edu)
Lab tutors

In addition to the TAs, the following lab tutors will also be staffing the labs at various times, specified further below.

Adrian Ong
Advay Anand
Isaac Berman
Jian-Cheng Huang
Liam Porat
Zhe Yuan
Course organization

In-person format

This course will be administered in a predominantly in-person format. What this means, chiefly, is that your physical presence on campus will be required at various points throughout the quarter, and that we will not be guaranteeing a separate virtual experience to students who are not physically attending at those times.

Required equipment

In order to participate in this course successfully, you may at times find it helpful if you have access to a few things.

A laptop or desktop computer with a webcam and a microphone. Most laptops come equipped with the webcam and microphone you'd need; if not, there are a variety of inexpensive options available via Amazon and other outlets. While the course is largely an in-person offering, the webcam and microphone will be necessary to communicate with us remotely, when circumstances call for it.
You'll also need an Internet connection that is fast and stable enough to stream online videos, and you'll need to be able to reach online services such as Canvas, Zoom, Ed Discussion, and YuJa, and your @uci.edu email via that connection. These services are part of how we'll be communicating. If Internet accessibility is a problem, there are some resources at UCI TechPrep that might be of help.
And, of course, you'll also be doing your programming projects and reinforcement exercises on a laptop or desktop computer, as well, and there's a pretty good chance that you'll want it to be the same one, because a factor in our ability to help you debug your work remotely, when circumstances call for it, will be our ability to see it in real time and discuss it with you.
Lecture

A lecture meets on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 6:30-7:50pm in EH 1200. Given the course's size, attendance is not graded, but we certainly recommend it. (Naturally, attendance is required on the days when exams are held, which are listed in the Schedule.)

Pre-recorded videos

Portions of the lecture material will be pre-recorded and will be available to officially-enrolled students via the Canvas course space for ICS 46, in addition to the lecture material that is scheduled to be presented in-person. It is reasonable to expect that a decisive majority of the lecture material will be presented in-person and will not separately be available via pre-recorded videos. You'll see that the video content is listed in the Schedule, alongside the lecture content.

Of course, you are under no obligation to watch the pre-recorded videos, and we will not be measuring whether or not you do so. For the most part, the lectures and any pre-recorded videos will corresponding pretty closely with the Notes and Examples, as is usual in my courses these days. But it's hard to imagine you'll get what you came for without watching the videos and attending the lectures.

Where to go online

While the course is predominantly an in-person offering, there are aspects of the course that are administered online.

This course web site is where you'll go to find out how the course is organized, what lecture material you should be learning about, and what you should be working on (projects, reinforcement exercises) in support of that.
A Canvas course space will also be available, which is where you'll find any video recordings and links to Zoom meetings. You'll also submit your work there, and will find your raw scores on that work once we've graded it.
Any recorded videos that are part of this course will be made available on YuJa, which you'll find linked through the Canvas course space.
Zoom will be used for any online meetings, including my office hours throughout the quarter. Note that all Zoom meetings will be set up to require you to be authenticated as a UCI user; more details on that below.
Additionally, we will have an Ed Discussion discussion board for the course, subject to certain rules about its usage — which also can have an effect on your overall grade; see below.
Throughout the quarter, we will be sending email to your @uci.edu email address, so you'll need to ensure that you're able to read and respond to emails sent there.
Online decorum

It should go without saying — though the recent experiences of other instructors around the country tell me otherwise — that we expect a reasonable level of decorum within all of these online spaces at all times. While I won't be able to describe all the ways that you might misbehave, do be aware that we will not tolerate behavior that is offensive to others, or that disrespects others; just because you're online doesn't relieve you of your obligation to be collegial with one another and with course staff, and there will be repercussions when you do not meet that obligation.

Reinforcement exercises

Roughly corresponding to each week's lecture material will be a collection of reinforcement exercises, whose role is to help you assess your knowledge of each topic. Think of these as "Things you should expect to be able to do and/or explain if you understood this topic well," so they are a sort of measuring stick that you can use to gauge your understanding. They do contribute to your grade (see below), but also contribute to your ensuring that you leave this course with what you came for.

These exercises will be released as they are available. Asking when these will be available will not make them available; they'll be posted when they are.

Lab meetings

While there are no scheduled lab sections in this course, we will be offering in-person lab meetings on a selection of days and times throughout the week, which provides you with a place to go to get individualized help on your projects and reinforcement exercises. The links to these meetings can be found on the Canvas course space.

During these times, some combination of TAs and lab tutors will be available to help you as you work through your projects. C++ requires an attention to detail that is uncharacteristically high, even for programming, so it will be handy to have a place you can go to get help; keep this on your calendar. You're free to come and go as you'd like within that time; there are no "sections" or other formal arrangement, and you do not need an appointment to attend.

The lab meetings begin on Thursday, March 31. Times and locations are listed below.

Days/Times	Location	TAs and/or Tutors
M 10:00am-11:30am	ICS2 100	Isabela Figueira (TA)
M 12:00pm-2:00pm	ICS2 100	Adrian Ong
M 2:00pm-4:00pm	ICS2 100	Jian-Cheng Huang
M 4:00pm-6:00pm	ICS2 100	Isaac Berman
Tu 10:00am-12:00pm	ICS2 100	Liam Porat
Tu 12:00pm-2:00pm	ICS2 100	Zhe Yuan
Tu 2:00pm-3:30pm	ICS2 100	Jessica Souza (TA)
W 10:00am-11:30am	ICS2 100	Isabela Figueira (TA)
W 2:00pm-4:00pm	ICS2 100	Jian-Cheng Huang
W 4:00pm-6:00pm	ICS2 100	Isaac Berman
Th 10:00am-12:00pm	ICS2 100	Liam Porat
Th 12:00pm-2:00pm	ICS2 100	Zhe Yuan
Th 2:00pm-3:30pm	ICS2 100	Jessica Souza (TA)
Th 3:00pm-5:00pm	ICS2 100	Advay Anand
F 12:00pm-2:00pm	ICS2 100	Adrian Ong
F 2:00pm-4:00pm	ICS2 100	Advay Anand
Ed Discussion

A course space has been created on Ed Discussion. You'll find a link to Ed Discussion on this course's Canvas page.

Within Ed Discussion, you'll be able to ask us (and each other) questions about course material, and can expect to see both course staff and students answering those questions along the way. It is our hope that this can be a useful resource to you, and the course staff will be glad to be of service there throughout the quarter.

However, it's important to note that Ed Discussion is only a positive and productive tool if students use a certain level of etiquette and care in using it, so we'll be requiring that — and your grade can be negatively affected if you do otherwise. So what does that mean? In practice, it means a few things.

Before asking a question, read the course web site thoroughly and make sure it's not a question that's clearly answered there already. In a typical quarter, about a third of the email I get from students are things that are clearly already discussed in detail on the course web site; I'd like that ratio to be lower on Ed Discussion, since that's not just a drag on my time, but, more importantly, is a drag on everyone's time, including other students.
Before asking a question, use the search box to find existing questions that have already been asked that would already provide your answer. Especially as we get later in a project cycle or nearer to a due date on a reinforcement exercise, many questions will already have been asked and answered; if so, you asking the question again is a drag on everyone's time.
Do not, under any circumstances, post your solutions — in whole or in part — to projects or reinforcement exercises. Note that there is no size threshold below which you can post your work (e.g., "It was only two lines of code!"); we have a zero-tolerance policy for sharing any part of it. If your question is so specific to your own program that it can't be asked without divulging the contents of your work, or your speculation about whether an answer (or part of an answer) might be correct, you'll need to ask the question elsewhere, such as a lab meeting or via email.
Do not, under any circumstances, ask questions on Ed Discussion about how your work was graded, how your work will be graded, or how others' work was graded. Inquiries about scoring must be made directly to the relevant course staff member via email.
Ed Discussion is a forum for course-related content, discussing and learning about related things (e.g., aspects of C++ not being taught in the course), and getting assistance. It is not a general discussion forum, nor is it a social media platform, so keep the discussion on topic. We are holding you to the standard of treating each other with respect, which importantly includes respecting other people's time (which is why we're forbidding off-topic discussion). Additionally, we will not tolerate any type of personal attacks, memes, cyber-bullying, negativity, or hurtful behavior.
Textbooks

This course requires no textbook, as I will be providing a complete set of Notes and Examples covering every lecture this quarter.

Note that you might find a book that complements the lecture material and helps you fill in details that you missed while listening to me speak for eighty minutes, though I think the Notes and Examples section will generally be enough information for you to succeed. If you prefer a book (or online supplements of your own choosing) other than what I'm providing, that's generally fine, though do be aware that style and approach among practitioners of a programming language tend to differ, particularly with respect to a language as large and complex as C++. We'll be expecting you to follow similar conventions to what we're learning about in this course.

Accommodations for disabilities

Any students who feel that they may need an accommodation based on the impact of a disability should contact me privately to discuss these specific needs. Also, contact the Disability Services Center online or by phone at (949) 824-7494 as soon as possible to better ensure that such accommodations, such as alternative test-taking environments or note-taking services, can be arranged for you in a timely way.

Grading

Weights of graded artifacts

Your course grade will be determined from the weighted combination of your scores on each of six programming projects, eight sets of reinforcement exercises, and an in-person Final Exam. The weights of each of these are:

One "set-up" project, 3%
Five projects, 40% (weighted equally at 8% each)
Eight sets of reinforcement exercises, 24% (weighted equally at 3% each)
Final Exam, 33%
Online participation and decorum

While it is not our intent to measure your participation — in the sense that we won't be tracking whether you're attending the lectures, watching pre-recorded videos, attending the lab sessions, and so on — we are requiring that students meet the decorum requirements described above. We reserve the right to deduct as much as 10% from a student's grade when their behavior does not follow those decorum requirements, with repeated or severe violations warranting larger-sized deductions. My sincere hope is that no one will receive these deductions, but we do reserve the right to use them if need be.

(Note, too, that you'll be notified as soon as we've decided that you'll be receiving one of these deductions, so you don't need to worry that we'll suddenly be reducing your score at the end of the quarter unannounced.)

Determining final grades

Course grades will be determined neither on a normal curve nor a straight scale. It is guaranteed that overall scores over 90% will receive an A- or better, scores over 80% will receive a B- or better, and scores over 70% will receive a C or better. However, the actual cutoffs may be lowered at the end of the quarter. In short, it is not my intention to fail half of the students, nor am I planning on giving only 2% of the students A's, but I prefer not to constrain myself with either a straight scale or a formalized curve.

Unforeseen circumstances may lead to changes

This course has been designed specifically for in-person delivery, in a way that takes into account the potential for some uncertainty along the way. While we'll certainly do our best to leave these policies — as well as the general structure of this course — intact, it is possible that unforeseen circumstances amidst uncertain times may require us to make modifications along the way. If so, we'll make those modifications in a way that attempts to preserve the spirit of the course and its grading to the extent possible, and we'll notify everyone of any necessary changes as soon as we can.

Dropping the course or changing grade option

Through the end of Week 2 (Friday, April 8), you may drop the course by simply going to WebReg and dropping it. If you wish to drop the course after that date, you will need to use the Enrollment Exceptions system to request a drop; I do not have the final say over those, ultimately, as the Dean of the Bren School (and your major, if you are majoring in something outside of the Bren School) must approve them. It is not generally the case that an exception will be accepted simply because you're not doing well in a course, though extenuating circumstances are certainly considered.

Similarly, changing your grade option (to Pass/NotPass or back again) can be done via WebReg through the end of Week 2 (Friday, April 8), after which you must use the Enrollment Exceptions system to request the change. As with exceptional drops, you must receive approval from the appropriate Deans, and that approval is not guaranteed.

Academic honesty

The policy

As a student enrolled in ICS 46, you are expected to know and follow the academic honesty policies of both the Bren School of ICS and the University as a whole. Please take a few minutes to read the policies, which can be found at this link.

All of your work on projects and reinforcement exercises is expected to be completed solely by you. Working in larger groups and/or sharing of code or solutions between students is not permitted. Note that "high-level discussion of course material for better understanding" is permitted and encouraged, but when it comes time to sit down and write code, that is expected to be done by you and you alone. All submissions are compared to one another using an automated plagiarism detection system. This system is extraordinarily good at finding similarities between submissions, even when there are superficial differences. (Note that we also compare your submissions to those submitted during previous quarters whenever one of these assignments was given during a previous quarter, so it is an exceedingly bad idea to turn in, or even refer to, code written by a friend of yours who took the course already.)

Since all of your work is expected to be completed solely by you, you will be held responsible even if you plagiarize only a small portion of someone else's work.

Academic honesty is a two-way street. Providing your code to other students for them to turn in as their own is not permitted any more than turning in someone else's code. Resist the temptation to give code to your friends "for reference." Based on my experience, I can say that your "friends" may very well betray you and turn it in, anyway, and then you'll have a lot to answer for.

Naturally, the Final Exam is also expected to be an individual effort. Dishonest behavior during an exam will not be tolerated.

All violations of academic honesty policies will be reported to the UCI Office of Academic Integrity & Student Conduct (AISC) and will trigger an administrative procedure, which is described on their web site. Additionally (and at least as importantly), you can receive a course grade of F — as a number of students in my courses do, because of this issue, every quarter — without the option to drop the course to avoid the grade. A single documented case of academic dishonesty may also have other ramificiations, such as precluding you from switching into computing majors, registering for computing minors, joining the ICS Honors Program, and graduating from a computing major with honors. All of this is University and Bren School of ICS policy and is not subject to negotiation.

Knowing when you're being dishonest

I've been asked by students how they know when they're crossed the line between asking for help and being academically dishonest. To me, there is a fairly straightforward way to know the difference. Did you actually write the code in question? That's not a matter of whether you typed it in; that's a matter of whether it was you who wrote it (i.e., it is comprised of your own ideas about how to solve the problem, how to organize the solution, and so on).

The easiest way to determine whether you've crossed the line is whether your work was driven by someone else's existing solution. Here are some examples:

If you ask someone to help you resolve a compile-time or run-time error in your program, so you would understand what the error meant, that's fine.
If you ask someone for help on a project and they responded by giving you a copy of their work, you already have one foot on the line the moment you receive it. If I were you, I would delete it, or not ask for it in the first place.
If you ask someone else to help you understand a concept like recursion or the use of pointers, and the other student suggests a way you might think differently about the problem you're solving, that's fine.
If you ask someone else to help you understand how to solve part of the project, and the other student brings up a copy of his or her solution and walks you through it — even if you don't look at it yourself — you've crossed the line.
If you obtain a copy of someone else's solution to a project and you refer to it and use it to drive the work you're doing — in whole or in part — you've most definitely crossed the line. Copying someone else's code, typing in someone else's code, taking someone else's code and cosmetically changing it to make it appear superficially different are all (obvious) examples of academically dishonest behavior, yet upwards of 10% of my students are caught doing this — and sanctioned for it — every quarter. Please don't be one of them.
If you provide someone with a copy of your work and they submit it as their own, you are also involved in academically dishonest behavior, and you should be aware that you can also be sanctioned for this, just as the other student can. Your best bet is not to share your work with other students, yet a not-insignificant percentage of my students are caught doing this every quarter, as well.
In my view, this really isn't that complicated. We require you to do your own work, because that's how the learning is done in this course. A large part of what you're learning to do is to design and write programs, a skill that can only be built by designing and writing programs. You have to make the decisions about what to do next, how to organize your program, and so on. If someone else is making most of those decisions for you, you're not building the skills necessary to be ready for the courses that follow on from this one. And, from the standpoint of academic honesty, if someone else is making most of those decisions for you, that's plagiarism.

The lesson

Okay, so the moral of the story is that it's wise to avoid cheating. I believe that it's relatively rare that students enter a course with the conscious intent to cheat their way through it; why come to UCI if you're not planning to get something out of the coursework? So why do people cheat every quarter in every course? The answers vary, but here's the easiest way I can boil down the numerous conversations I've had with students caught cheating in my courses over the years: I fell behind and couldn't figure out how to catch up. Things happen and ten-week quarters are unforgiving. You might get sick, you might have issues crop up in your family, you might have misunderstood one of the earlier topics in this course (or one or more important topics in previous coursework) on which later topics depended, you might have an off-campus job that's demanding too much of your time, you might be trying to decide whether you're on the overall life path you want to be on... Any of those things (and many others) can make it hard to keep up. You fall a little behind, you fall a little further behind, and pretty soon the situation seems hopeless. You're under pressure, temptation gets the better of you, and suddenly it seems better to submit someone else's work than to submit nothing. As upwards of 10% of my students (who have cheated like this) can attest, it's not.

If you feel like you're beginning to slip off course or things are getting beyond your control, the best thing to do is to talk to us sooner rather than later. We're here to help; we understand. But the reality of taking large-sized courses at a large-sized institution is that we're not going to know you're in need unless you tell us. If things are happening in your life, tell us; you don't have to be specific if you're not comfortable with it. Before the fact, there's often a way to work things out. After the fact, it's usually too late.

And, in general, some students won't pass this course with a C or better this quarter, and won't be ready to take follow-on courses yet. And that's not as disastrous as it sounds. Most students who get less than a C in ICS 46 take the course again; most of those who take the course again pass it the second time around, with their feet firmly underneath them and ready to move forward.

Sharing your own solutions online

Some of our past students have wanted to post their own solutions to their projects online, with the goal of helping others or just showing off work that they were proud of. This is also problematic from an academic honesty perspective, because many or all of the projects you're working on will be reused in a future quarter; good problems are good problems, and I don't rebuild five new projects every quarter. Given that, posting your prior work online will absolutely lead to other students finding it and plagiarizing it — this is now one of the more common root causes of plagiarism cases that we find.

I can appreciate, of course, that you might want to build a portfolio of work to demonstrate your skills as you build them, and I'm not unsympathetic about that. However, the reality is that posting solutions to first-year coursework is very unlikely to be of use in job searches or other professional scenarios. I've asked a number of hiring managers over the years, including ones I've worked for in my industry career, and have universally received the same response about it: Hiring managers generally aren't interested in seeing prior homework. Projects in courses like this one are sanitized, in the sense that they're problems that have been designed to be solved using techniques just taught, with the requirements clearly spelled out, and with few enough rough edges that a large number of students can solve them without encountering roadblocks that can't be overcome. Real-world work isn't like this, as it turns out. Figuring out what needs to be built is as important as figuring out how to build it. Building a portfolio is best done with your own solutions to your own problems, containing things you've written to scratch your own technology itches or explore concepts that you wanted to learn more about on your own.

So, in general, despite the fact that you may be proud of the work you've done, you need to understand that there is a very strong likelihood that the only thing you'll be doing is enabling future students to plagiarize your work — and quite possibly becoming embroiled in the investigation yourself and being reported to AISC — while not accomplishing much of anything positive for youself.

Do not share your prior solutions online.